- kubernets is a distributed system

- Real kubernets is designed to run on:
    - multiple machines
    - multiple nodes
    - real networking
    - real production environments

- but in real life we have one laptop, limited RAM etc... so we need a way to run a fake/lightweight kubernets cluster on our local machines and for that we need to use minikube, kind, k3s, docker desktop kubernets, microk8s
These tools are basically local kubernets environments



1. Understand Exactly What KIND Is Doing On Your Machine

Since you are using KIND, you must be crystal clear about this:
    When you run:
        kind create cluster

        You are NOT creating magic.
        You are literally creating:
            👉 Docker containers acting as Kubernetes nodes.
            Run this right now:
            docker ps

        You will see something like:
            kind-control-plane
            kind-worker
            kind-worker2

Each of those containers is a full Linux machine running:
    kubelet
    kube-proxy
    container runtime
    networking stack

    This means:
    Your Kubernetes cluster = just Docker containers talking to each other.
    If you don’t understand this mental model, you will never truly understand Kubernetes.


WHAT HAPPENS WHEN WE RUN:
    kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml

Step 0- Before command
we have:
    A KIND cluster running
    Control plane container
    etcd database
    API server
    and we have deployment.yaml

Step 1- Kubectl reads the file    
    kubectl does only one job: it sends the YAML data to the Kubernets API server
    kubectl is NOT Kubernetes.
    kubectl = just a client tool (like Postman for Kubernetes)

Step 2- Request goes to API server
    API server is the brain/entry gate
    kubectl says: Hey API server, here is a Deployment object, please create it

other steps follows acoording to previous notes



WHERE IS ETCD RUNNING IN KIND?

- In KIND, everything is just Docker containers.
when we run kind create cluster
KIND creates a container like kind-control-plane, inside that container: etcd is running as a process
to verify this we can use command docker ps , docker exec -it kind-control-plane bash, ps aux | grep etcd
In KIND, etcd runs inside the control-plane Docker container.
There is no separate machine.
Everything is simulated.


How Networking Works Between Pods in KIND?

In Kubernetes:
👉 Every Pod gets its own IP address
And:
👉 All pods can talk to all other pods directly
WITHOUT NAT.

In KIND:
    - each node = docker container
    inside those containers: KIND sets up a CNI (Container Network Interface)
    Usually: kindnet (default CNI for KIND)

When a pod is created:

    CNI plugin assigns IP
    Routes are configured
    kube-proxy updates rules
    Pod becomes reachable

    for example pod A on worker1 and pod B on worker2
    even though they are in diff docker containers 
    they can still do: ping pod-b-ip
    Because KIND sets up virtual network bridge between node containers.

    Service Layer:
    Normally we don't call pods directly
    we create a service
    service gives: stable IP+ DNS name

    so communication becomes: frontend pod → service → backend pod
    kube-proxy handles this routing.






- To go inside docker container terminal we can use: docker exec -it [container_name] bash
- To see actual files of etcd we can go to /var/lib/etcd/member and ls -F

    by doing above we can get snap/ and wal/ 

    wal/ is write ahead log : every single timw when we run kubectl create the change is instantly written here first, it's a seq log of every transaction, if the power goes cut, etcd replays this log to recover the data 

    snap/ the save point, To prevent the WAL from growing forever, etcd periodically takes a "snapshot" of the current state and saves it here. it compresses old logs into single file to save space


kubectl is like a website's front-end. It talks to the "manager" (API Server), who then talks to the database.

etcdctl is like logging directly into the database backend. It bypasses the API Server and talks directly to etcd.


You rarely use etcdctl in daily work. However, it is critical for:
Backups & Restore: Taking snapshots of the cluster state (required for the CKA exam and disaster recovery).
Debugging: Checking if data is actually being written when the API Server is broken.


1. The API Version (ETCDCTL_API=3)

    Etcd has two versions of its API: v2 and v3. They are incompatible. Kubernetes uses v3.
    If you don't tell the tool to use v3, it might default to v2, and you will see "0" results even though data exists.
    Fix: Always type ETCDCTL_API=3 before the command.

2. The "Secret Handshake" (Certificates)
Your etcd is secure. It uses TLS (HTTPS). It will not talk to you unless you present a valid ID card (Certificate). You cannot just run etcdctl get /. You must provide:

    --cacert: The Authority that signed the ID cards.
    --cert: Your ID card (Public key).
    --key: Your password (Private key).

3. The Endpoint
You must tell it where etcd lives. Usually https://127.0.0.1:2379.

ETCDCTL_API=3 etcdctl \
  --cacert=/etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.crt \
  --cert=/etc/kubernetes/pki/apiserver-etcd-client.crt \
  --key=/etc/kubernetes/pki/apiserver-etcd-client.key \
  get / --prefix --keys-only



kind = lifecycle management (create, start,stop,delete), it talks to docker daemon, it tells docker that please spin up a container and install kubernets components
kind is the TV Manufacturer (Samsung/Sony). Its job is to build and set up the TV (the Cluster).
kind itself is NOT Kubernetes. It is a program that creates Kubernetes.

kubectl = Operational Management (Run pods, debug, view state). is the Universal Remote Control. Its job is to change the channels (deploy apps), adjust volume (scale pods), and check settings (logs). It doesn't care who built the TV (Kind, AWS, Google, or Minikube)—as long as it's a standard TV, the remote works.



When you installed Docker Desktop on Windows, it didn't just install Docker. It also quietly installed a few common tools, including kubectl, to make your life easier. It bundled them together so you wouldn't have to hunt for them later.


Kustomize is a tool for managing complex YAML files. Instead of copying and pasting YAML files for "Development", "Staging", and "Production", Kustomize allows you to keep one "Base" file and just apply small "Patches" (overlays) on top of it.